---
title: "English Football League Stadiums: An Interactive Map"
date: 2019-09-11
tags: [Data Cleaning, Data Visualisation]
header:
excerpt: "Data Cleaning, Data Visualisation"
---

<iframe src="https://public.tableau.com/views/FootballStadiums_15682120730760/Sheet1?:embed=y&:display_count=yes&:origin=viz_share_link&:showVizHome=no"
 width="645" height="955"></iframe>

 Data
 ====

 The data for the above visualisation came from two sources. Firstly the
 club names and divisions came from
 [this](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_football_clubs_in_England)
 wikipedia page. Secondly the information regarding the stadium locations
 and capacities came from
 [here](https://www.doogal.co.uk/FootballStadiums.php).

 Web Scraping
 ============

 We begin by loading the required packages.

     # Load necessary packages
     library(dplyr)

     ##
     ## Attaching package: 'dplyr'

     ## The following objects are masked from 'package:stats':
     ##
     ##     filter, lag

     ## The following objects are masked from 'package:base':
     ##
     ##     intersect, setdiff, setequal, union

     library(htmltab)
     library(stringdist)

 Next we scrape the data from the two webpages and subset it to only
 include the columns of interest.

     # Scrape Data from wikipedia and subset columns of interest
     data <- NULL
     for(i in 2:26){
     x <- htmltab("https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_football_clubs_in_England", i, rm_nodata_cols = F)
     data <- rbind(data, x)
     }
     data <- subset(data[, -5], data$Lvl %in% c("1", "2", "3", "4"))

     # Scrape stadium data
     stadiums <- htmltab("https://www.doogal.co.uk/FootballStadiums.php", 1, rm_nodata_cols = F)

 The stadium data comes from the top 5 divisions of english football and
 the top 4 divisions of Scottish football but we only want the top four
 divisions of english football. Also, there are differences between the
 two lists of club names in the two lists (for example West Ham vs West
 Ham United). Finally the second list is out of date with some of the
 clubs appearing in the list despite not still being in the football
 league and vice versa. This will require some fidly data cleaning.
 Firstly we use the amatch algorithm to look for discrepancies between
 the names of clubs in the two lists.

     # Atempt to match the team names in the two lists
     matching <- data.frame(data$Club, Matching = stadiums$Team[amatch(data$Club, stadiums$Team, maxDist = 100)], stringsAsFactors = FALSE)

 We now display a list of the teams not corrects matched by the above
 procedure.

     # Here we list the teams names which are not exactly matched by this algorithm.
     unmatched <- matching[!(matching[,1] == matching[,2]),]
     unmatched

     ##                 data.Club                 Matching
     ## 1      A.F.C. Bournemouth              Bournemouth
     ## 2        A.F.C. Wimbledon                Dumbarton
     ## 13 Brighton & Hove Albion Brighton and Hove Albion
     ## 35    Forest Green Rovers         Doncaster Rovers
     ## 38           Grimsby Town             Crawley Town
     ## 45           Lincoln City             Bristol City
     ## 54     Milton Keynes Dons                  MK Dons
     ## 72           Salford City            Bradford City
     ## 79              Stevenage                  Arsenal
     ## 89        West Ham United          Hereford United

 For three teams (namely Bournemouth, Brighton and MK dons) the correct
 matching is clear. They are still in the football league and were at the
 time of creation of the stadiums dataset. So we simply adjust the name
 of the club within the stadiums dataset to match that of the wikipedia
 data.

     # Adjust Bournemouth, Brighton and MK dons
     stadiums$Team[stadiums$Team == "Bournemouth"] <- "A.F.C. Bournemouth"
     stadiums$Team[stadiums$Team == "Brighton and Hove Albion"] <- "Brighton & Hove Albion"
     stadiums$Team[stadiums$Team == "MK Dons"] <- "Milton Keynes Dons"

 Now Wimbledon, Stevenage and West Ham are all members of the football
 league and were also memebers at the time of creation of the stadiums
 dataset. However the algorithm has not matched them correctly so we must
 manually inspect the correct variation in name of each of these three
 clubs and correct them.

     # Adjust Wimbledon, Stevenage and West Ham
     stadiums$Team[stadiums$Team == "AFC Wimbledon, Kingstonian"] <- "A.F.C. Wimbledon"
     stadiums$Team[stadiums$Team == "Stevenage Borough"] <- "Stevenage"
     stadiums$Team[stadiums$Team == "West Ham"] <- "West Ham United"

 Finally Forest Green Rovers, Grimsby, Lincoln and Salford are all now
 members of the football league but were not at the time of creation of
 the stadiums dataset. Thus we must manually search for this information
 to add it to the data set. Some searching on the internet revealed the
 correct information for these teams.

     additions <- data.frame(c("The New Lawn", "Blundell Park", "Sincil Bank", "The Peninsula Stadium"),
                             c("Forest Green Rovers","Grimsby Town","Lincoln City","Salford City"),
                             c("5,140",  "9,052", "10,120", "5,108"),
                             c("51.6991", "53.5701", "53.2184", "53.5138"),
                             c("-2.2377", "-0.0450", "-0.5404", "-2.2764"))

 We add this new information to the dataset.

     colnames(additions) <- colnames(stadiums)
     stadiums <- rbind(stadiums, additions)

 We subset the stadiums dataset to contain only the 92 football league
 clubs.

     stadiums <- stadiums[stadiums$Team %in% data$Club,]

 Finally we merge the two datasets and drop the Lvl column.

     colnames(stadiums)[2] <- "Club"
     finalData <- merge(data, stadiums)[,-3]

 Since the data was slightly out of date we can manually update some of
 the relevant fields.

     finalData$Capacity[finalData$Club == "Watford"] <- "21,577"
     finalData$Capacity[finalData$Club == "Tottenham Hotspur"] <- "62,214"

 Let's take a look at the tidied dataset.

     str(finalData)

     ## 'data.frame':    92 obs. of  7 variables:
     ##  $ Club           : chr  "A.F.C. Bournemouth" "A.F.C. Wimbledon" "Accrington Stanley" "Arsenal" ...
     ##  $ League/Division: chr  "Premier League" "Football League One" "Football League One" "Premier League" ...
     ##  $ Nickname       : chr  "Cherries" "Dons" "Stanley" "Gunners" ...
     ##  $ Stadium name   : chr  "Seward Stadium" "Kingsmeadow" "Crown Ground" "Emirates Stadium" ...
     ##  $ Capacity       : chr  "10,700" "4,720" "5,057" "60,361" ...
     ##  $ Latitude       : chr  "50.7352" "51.4051" "53.7654" "51.5549" ...
     ##  $ Longitude      : chr  "-1.83839" "-0.281984" "-2.37106" "-0.108436" ...

 We can now save this to the file "finalData.csv" and then use Tableau to
 make the graphic.

     write.csv(finalData, file = "finalData.csv")
